# Assumptions belong in types

I'm writing a piece of [highly situated
software](https://www.drmaciver.com/2018/11/situated-software/) to log in to a
crappy website.

This website asks for three random characters of my password, which I don't
know, because I use [a password manager](https://1password.com/). So, for
example, when I log in they might ask for characters 3, 5, and 11 of my
password.

I don't know why they picked "three" as the magic number of characters, and I
don't know whether they are going to change it. But because I'm not writing a
general library, and because it gets the job done, I'm going to assume 3.

My first cut of this code stored the three requested positions in a list: `[3,
5, 11]`, and then accessed each element of this list as needed: `positions !!
0`, `positions !! 1`, `positions !! 2`. This is fine.

However, because scraping is a bit of a dark art, and because websites can
return different things at times, what happened was that the parsing code
could merrily return an empty list of positions, and then the code that *used*
these positions would blow up with `Prelude.!!: index too large`.

A different post would go on about partial functions. This isn't that post.
For this highly situated software, it's OK if things blow up because of
unhandled cases. The problem is it's blowing up in the wrong place. The bit
that actually failed was the *parsing*, but that failure only manifested
itself in the code that was assuming that there were 3 positions.

The solution is to move the assumption from the code to the type. So we change
`positions :: [Int]` to `positions :: (Int, Int, Int)`. This makes it
impossible for the parser to construct a wrong value, which forces the failure
into the parser.

In some ways this is just a riff on ["make illegal states
unrepresentable"](https://blog.janestreet.com/effective-ml-revisited/). The
insight for me is that "illegal" carries connotations of "bad", "wrong",
"immoral", whereas the advice holds for "against the (arbitrary) rules" or
"out of bounds". It's "illegal" in the sense that picking up a football and
carrying it toward the goal is illegal—it's just not what we're *doing* here.
In this case, there's nothing wrong about the website asking me for 4
characters of my password (or even all of them!), I'm just assuming that they
won't to save myself some time.

In summary:

* it's OK to make crappy, specific assumptions that are probably wrong in some general case
* embed these assumptions in your types, so you can't construct assumption-breaking values
* please just ask me for my password
