# Recent(ish) reading

I used to do a quarterly post on [my personal blog](https://life.jml.io)
listing what I'd read that quarter. That fell by the wayside earlier this
year, for reasons that I haven't looked into.

Here's some stuff I've read since [my last
post](https://life.jml.io/2018/05/reading-update-may-2018.html):

## Fiction

_The Wind's Twelve Quarters_, Ursula K. Le Guin. I bought this just after she
died, because I wanted to have a legit copy of _The Ones Who Walk Away from
Omelas_ to give to Jolie to read. It's twelve short stories from various
stages of her career, each with a short preface. I hate even attempting to
review them, especially since the details have faded. What I remember is her
passionate intensity, her heavy (but not heavy-handed) playfulness, and her
intimidating intelligence. The stories are universally excellent, but very few
are entertaining.

_The Flowers of Vashnoi_, Lois McMaster Bujold. I love Bujold and will read
anything she writes. I didn't get into this one as much as others. I wonder if
she likes Ekaterin?

_Uprooted_, Naomi Novik. This is charming. _Howl's Moving Castle_ meets Polish
fairytales, or something. I enjoyed it so much I went and bought three volumes
of her _Temeraire_ series, which is not quite as good.

_The Consuming Fire_, John Scalzi. I mostly buy Scalzi's books to support his
blogging habit. This sequel to _The Collapsing Empire_ is fun, light reading
that only rarely insults your intelligence.

_The Labyrinth Index_, Charles Stross. I've been reading _The Laundry Files_
for an age, and don't really know how to stop. This one is probably my
favourite of the last three or four.

_Temeraire_ and _Throne of Jade_, Naomi Novik. Dragons: check. Napoleonic
naval fiction: check. Bromance: check. I don't think I could recommend it
strongly if these are not your things.

## Non-fiction

_Managing Humans_, Michael Lopp. I've been trying to get better at being a
manager, and I thought I'd revisit the book that got me into this in the first
place. I found it very hard going. Lopp definitely has good advice, but so
much of it is predicated on assumptions that just don't hold for me. Also, he
is way too brash and confident. These days, I'd recommend _The Manager's Path_
by Camille Fournier instead.

_Accelerate_, (too many to list here). This is a review of a bunch of research
that shows that lean practices in IT correlate (and sometimes cause!) great
outcomes for the business as a whole. If you already believe that, you're not
going to get a huge amount out of this book. I think 80% of the people who
talk about it haven't read it (it's very dry), and that's actually OK.

_The Internet of Garbage_, Sarah Jeong. I have a deep and abiding interest in
[rubbish](https://life.jml.io/2009/05/meditations-on-garbage-bin.html). Jeong
points out that much of the Internet is garbage and we don't have systems in
place for dealing with it. It's a very good, short analysis of the problems
we're facing now. I only wish it were longer.


