# Reading books

I've been trying to nudge myself away from reading books on my iPad.

The main reason for this is that I want to set a better visual example for my
daughter. I love reading, and I want her to see me actually reading books,
rather than staring at my tablet.

However, good intentions often founder on the rocky shores of laziness.

Instead of reading from my iPad, I'm now reading more from my Kindle. I
definitely prefer this. The Kindle is smaller, lighter, easier to read from,
and never ever beeps or buzzes at me. If I want to switch away to some other
task, I have to take the very physical action of putting the Kindle down and
moving somewhere else. This is good.

_The Medici_ and _By the Pricking of my Thumbs_ were both paperbacks. The old
habits came back fairly quickly, and I remembered to take them with me on tube
journeys and such. There is definitely something very engrossing and pleasant
in reading a real, physical book, even if I didn't particularly like either
one.

The main disadvantage is that paperbacks are much harder to read while eating
than a Kindle. My Kindle has a stand, and only needs to be lightly brushed to
turn the page. The paperback must be held, forcing me to eat American style.
To turn the page, I have to set my fork down and (alas, all too often) wipe my
hands.

For the first bit of the Christmas break, I'm going to try to keep reading the
paperbacks we have around the house that I haven't read. Then, we're off to
the US, and I'll just take my Kindle.
