# Review: How to Invent Everything

From Ryan North, writer of _The Unbeatable Squirrel Girl_ and probably a bunch
of other stuff comes this book pretty squarely aimed at the "Christmas gifts
for your know-it-all friends" market.

The book is framed as a manual for a stranded time traveller: the quickest way
to repair your broken time machine is to rebuild civilisation from scratch,
here's how to do it. To that end, it comes with instructions on agriculture,
medicine, mathematics, material science, the scientific method, and lots more.

I would definitely want this book if I were stranded in the distant past. It's
well researched, and entertainingly written, and it covers a lot of bases.

The book makes much of the fact that we could have invented lots of things
much, much earlier than we did. All you need for a hot air balloon (it claims)
is a basket, some fabric (silk works great), and a fire. And yet, it took us
until the 19th century.

On the other hand, my personal circumstances made reading this book very
frustrating, for two reasons.

The first is that I'd just read _How to be a Tudor_, in which the author
speaks not only from research but from personal experience in actually living
out Tudor practices. She frequently points out that things are a lot more
complicated, precarious, or just plain _difficult_ than they first appear.
Lots that might appear simple is actually an advanced skill.

Second is that in doing management, it's really easy to observe how a bunch of
people who know what they are doing somehow fail to achieve the outcome they
set out to achieve, with no obvious single root cause and no one worthy of
blame. [DRMacIver points
out](https://www.drmaciver.com/2017/07/on-efficiency/) that "decision making
in large groups of people as the fundamental problem of civilisation". I'd go
one step further and say coordinating groups of people is the fundamental
problem of civilisation.

What this meant is that I ended up flipping through the pages going "I bet
it's not as simple as that" and "Yeah, but who do you get to mind the charcoal
fire, and who's bringing them lunch?" There's a (very cool) tech tree at the
back, but there's no plan for what to get done in your first ninety days, or
how many people you'd need to convince.

At a meta level, it's even more frustrating that there's no invention or
discovery in the field of management that merits inclusion in the book. Logic
rates a whole chapter, because it's amazingly useful, a prerequisite for
computers (which in turn are a prerequisite for video games), and because
dropping first order predicate logic in a page or two can save two thousand
years of wandering in the wilderness. But, with management, it's entirely
possible that we are just as bad at getting a group of people to work together
toward a goal as we have ever been.

If you're not in the same circumstances as I, and haven't asked "Yes, but how
do we actually execute on that?" in the last six months, then you might well
enjoy this book.
