# Review: The Medici

Jolie picked this book up during a trip to Florence a couple of years ago. I
picked it up again because I happened to notice it on the bookshelf, and
thought it would make good fodder for my Microscope game. It's by Paul
Strathern.

The book more or less uses the Medici as a thread to take a journey through
the Renaissance and early Baroque eras. In this regard, it works well. Art
history is a weak area of mine, and it helped me to have some sort of
chronology and political context to hang all those famous names off (all of
the ninja turtles make an appearance in this book).

I found the chapters on the Medici popes particularly interesting. I would
have naively assumed that the Protestant Reformation would have been at the
top of their agenda, but at least as Starthern frames it, they had more
important things to do, like marry off nieces and raise armies to defend the
papal states. Hindsight is 20/20, eh?

The book is studded with a weird pseudo-Freudian approach to analysing
characters. At one point, someone's homosexuality is attributed to his
domineering mother and absent father, and this is a typical sort of analysis
within the book. I'm pretty sceptical of the approach, and it's not defended
in the text, and so I am overall far less confident of the rest of his
analysis.

I read more in this book about Galileo than I have since I was in primary
school. I didn't realise just how great his achievements were, or that he was
the first in Europe to bring _quantification_ to science.

Instead of proper end notes, the book ends with an informal list of sources
for each chapter. I think rather than reading the book, one would be better
served to read through these notes, and then pick up any reference that
catches your fancy.
