# Reading: Digital Minimalism

I'm of two minds about Cal Newport's writing.

One part of me strongly agrees with his ideas, and very much wants to put his
suggestions into practice. This way especially the case with _Deep Work_.

Another part understands that he really is speaking to a very narrow group of
people as if they were universal.

_Digital Minimalism_ is Newport's attempt to answer the question: why are so
many people so uncomfortable about their relationship with their smartphone,
and what can be done about it? It's based on his own thinking and from talking
to lots of other people.

The core premise is that smartphones, the apps on them, and social media in
particular are largely built by advertising companies designed to keep you
checking again and again. I hope this is not controversial.

Then, Newport asserts that this is bad for people. That we need boredom,
solitude, and genuine face-to-face interactions not only to maintain our basic
mental health, but also to flourish. In particular, you can't do "deep work"
if you are constantly context switching. Again, I hope this is widely
accepted.

The rest of the book is Newport's interaction with various "digital
minimalists", and outlines a way to find your own minimalism.

The main gist is not that minimalists necessarily abstain from certain kinds
of technology, but rather that they understand that each new technology has
costs as well as benefits. They think about *why* they use a certain
technology and then decide *how* they will use it in line with that purpose.

For example, many writers will use Twitter to stay in touch with the world and
to, umm, promote their brand. However, a digital minimalist writer might only
do this in the afternoon after they have spent the morning actually writing on
a device that doesn't have access to Twitter at all.

For me, none of this seemed particularly interesting or novel, even within
Newport's corpus. It's been ages since I've removed social media apps from my
phone (largely inspired by _Deep Work_!), and at the start of the year I
removed "any app I have to check", as well as all browsers. Now, there's
nothing particularly entertaining on my phone, and I'm thus compelled to find
other solutions to momentary boredom.

Not having a web browser means that I often have to wait until I'm home to
look something interesting up. When I'm home, I'm just as likely to consult my
physical reference books as to open up my laptop to find a web browser. This
has brought back an unexpected pleasure from my childhood.

I don't want to take the high road on this. Everyone's different, and I do
enough stupid things with my time and technology that I don't want to hold
myself up as a model to emulate. That said, this works for me.
