# Personal productivity

A couple of people at work asked me to give a talk on personal productivity.

At first, I felt a crushing weight of dread. I do not feel at all productive
personally. I feel massively behind in all of my obligations, and on the days
when I have the opportunity to do self-directed work, I am very conscious that
no matter what I choose I am letting someone down. Instead of spending my time
doing things that need to be done, I spend my time doing other things that
need to be done.

Then, on reflection, I have read and thought and experimented with personal
productivity a *lot*. Probably too much. I would have no problems finding
enough content to fill a thirty minute talk. The challenge would be one of
picking exactly which things to say, and how to structure them for the
audience at hand.

What follows is a brain dump of topics I might want to include in
such a talk.

Almost none of the ideas are my own, but because I'm not a scholar I'm going
to be sloppy in citing sources. Please use your search engine of choice to
find the original authors.

* Reliability
  * Personally, a lot of the motivation comes trying to follow "Let your 'yes'
    be 'yes' and your 'no' be 'no'".
  * Organizations are built on promises of value that are either kept or
    renegotiated.
  * I am an intrinsically unreliable component, so I try to build a reliable
    system around me.
* GTD
  * Core principles
    * Capture everything
    * Small number of input channels
    * "What is the next physical action?"
    * Regular review
  * Calendar is a 'hard landscape'
    * Don't have overlapping appointments -- what does that even mean?
    * Don't have things on your calendar that you don't need to go to
    * Distinguish between informational calendar events
  * Don't use a thing as a reminder to do something about the thing
    * Tabs are the worst!
    * Emails are the second-worst
  * Deciding "what is the next physical action" is hard and avoiding that hard
    decision is a lot of the reason we keep emails around and tabs open.
    * See Siderea's "What are programs made out of"
  * Inbox Zero essentially GTD applied to email
    * *Not* actually doing everything required by every email every day
    * Instead, making a decision about each email and then writing that decision down
    * "Inbox" means "Stuff that I haven't processed yet"
    * Not doing this means O(N**2) inbox processing: each email gets
      re-assessed each time you look at your inbox
  * Vocab:
    * Next actions: things you can actually do
    * Projects: multi-action outcomes that you should review periodically
    * Areas of responsibility: project & next-action generators
  * Insight: to do a thing you need:
    * Time
    * Energy
    * Things specific to the task (e.g. phone & signal to make a phone call)
    * So:
      * build systems that let you filter for these
* GTD fails at helping you focus on a small number of things at a time
  * Excels at managing a breadth of tasks
* GTD is complementary to _Seven Habits_
* After doing a good GTD "session" I am very unclear on what it is I've done
  and don't feel very satisfied.
* You can only do one thing at a time
  * When you're multitasking, you're not really multitasking, you're time-slicing
  * There's an overhead to task switching
* Deep Work
  * You're not going to get anything valuable done while being constantly
    interrupted
    * Caveat: this is literally parenting, which is actually pretty valuable.
  * Block out chunks of time
  * Super-linear relationship between contiguous minutes and output, probably sub-linear after 4h?
  * Remove every app that you check, or has a thumb-pull action from your phone:
    * Email
    * Slack
    * Social media: Twitter; Instagram; Facebook
    * You know you're done when you start taking your phone out of your pocket
      because you're bored, and then realise that the only thing to do is
      learn a language.
  * Set up two-factor auth, then log out of every social media site
    * You can always log in when you need to
* Manage Your Energy
  * Four types
    * Physical: eat well, exercise, take breaks, get sleep, get sunshine
    * Emotional: quadrant (high & low energy; negative or positive)
    * Mental: distractions; attention
    * Spiritual: alignment of what you're doing with what you value
  * If you don't have energy to do stuff, then it doesn't matter how good your
    todo list is
* Productive procrastination
  * There will always be things that you need to do that you don't want to do
  * It's probably worth practicing some kind of mindfulness to work through
    this, but I'm terrible at that.
  * Instead, I do something else that really ought to be done. It's way better
    than Facebook.
* Kanban
  * My firm belief is that the real secret to productivity is having a small
    number of things "on the go"
  * Most of the stuff we do isn't valuable until it's actually *finished*
  * What matters isn't business, or how much we do in a given day. What
    matters is how much *finish*.
  * However I am colossally bad at this.
* Seven Habits
  * Circle of influence vs circle of concern
  * Begin with the end in mind
  * Sharpen the saw
    * Very useful to do this as productive procrastination
* Reflection
  * Writing down why something is important actually helps
    * I'm also bad at this
  * Writing down what you've *done* in terms that are meaningful to you (or
    your boss or a loved one) helps build a sense of achievement (which I
    sorely need) and stimulates useful thinking about the future
  * If you don't get some kind of distance / perspective, you are going to be
    very productive at the wrong thing. You'll also burn out.
  * You are not a machine
    * Go for a walk
    * Unplug from computer, phone, keyboard and just take pen & paper
    * Talk to someone!

That's enough for a first pass. I think there's probably two or three talks in
that.
