# Excellence in infrastructure teams

I started re-reading _Turn the Ship Around!_ the other night, this time
thinking very specifically about how I might apply the ideas in my own
situation.

One of the mechanisms for clarity is "Achieve excellence, don't just avoid
errors". If someone in charge of a floating nuclear reactor armed with
multiple nuclear warheads can have this attitude, it's at least worth trying
on the idea to see how it fits.

What does excellence in an infrastructure team look like?

First, I guess I should step back and describe my team a bit.

I'm in charge of the infrastructure team at Memrise. We're responsible for our
AWS infrastructure, Kubernetes deployment, monitoring, alerting, continuous
integration, continuous deployment, data pipelines, and probably a bunch of
other things too. Everyone in the team is on the on-call rota.

Literally the first thing I look at when I want to measure the health of the
team are the rate of errors in production (perfectly fine), and the number of
critical pages per day (well below 1). However, both of these are about
avoiding errors.

Obviously an ops team needs to avoid errors. But as the saying goes, if the
highest duty of a captain were the safety of her ship, she'd never leave the
harbour.

Here are some ideas, liberally pinched from the SRE book, and conversations
with my colleague JF-P.

Fundamentally, our role is about ensuring a great user experience for our end
users and customers. This means a service that is error-free, fast, and
reliable. While "error-free" and "reliable" include the avoidance of errors,
"fast" is something you can always get better at.

A lot of what we do is oriented toward our internal users: the software
developers and data analysts at Memrise. In many ways, the scope of their
achievements will be the mark of our own excellence.

This means we'll be building a system together with them that they can
understand, because it's simple and because we've provided great tools for
visibility. It means they'll be equipped to debug their own problems because
they've got the tools to do so, and whatever knowledge their lacking is
discoverable.

It also means that they'll have capabilities they didn't have before, and they
are using these to provide features we couldn't imagine before, faster than
ever.

And if we're being truly excellent, the nature of our own challenges will
change. The problems that we deal with today will be gone and we'll be facing
newer, tougher problems.[^1] As Miles Vorkosigan is wont to say, "the reward
for a job well done is usually a harder job".

That's all I've got for now. To summarise, excellence is:

1. Reliable
2. Fast
3. Equipping developers to go [higher, further, faster](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rVtIRaSU12Y)
4. Solving old problems, tackling new ones

This means nothing unless a team comes up with it for themselves, but maybe
this is a useful starting point.

What have I missed?


[^1]: What does this mean for hiring junior team members?
