# Notes: Peak

Itamar[^2], I think, have been recommending _Peak_ by Anders Ericsson
and Robert Pool for some time now. It's very much worth the read.

The book is largely about _deliberate practice_, something that Cal Newport
goes on about in his book _So Good They Can't Ignore You_. The rough thesis is
that spending time doing something generally won't make you better at it. If
you want to get better at something, you need to practice deliberately.

This is set against several myths:

 1. There's such a thing as "natural talent"
 2. There is a hard, intrinsic limit to your potential
 3. If you do something long enough, you are bound to get better at it
 4. If you try hard enough, you'll get better
 5. If you learn the right facts, you'll get better

All of these are bunk. Instead, if you want to get better at something, you
need to practice (more) in the right way. This is true of pretty much
everything you can think of.

The authors distinguish between two types of good practice: purposeful (good)
and deliberate (best).

_Purposeful practice_

* has well-defined goals
* is focused (i.e. you give practice your full attention)
* involves feedback, both
  * what you need to improve
  * how close you are to achieving your goals
* pushes past your comfort zone
* is usually solitary

The goals are supposed to be micro-goals aimed at addressing specific
weaknesses you are trying to improve. So, if you want to get better at sight
singing, you might aim to sing descending fourth intervals correctly three
times in a row, or something like that.

Because you need to focus and push past your comfort boundaries, practice
should rarely go longer than an hour. Get plenty of sleep, too.

It's also not fun. One of the wonderful insights in the book is that
approximately _no one_ enjoys practice. Sir Simon Keenlyside enjoys singing
practice just as much as I do.

_Deliberate practice_ is _purposeful practice_ that is also _informed_. This
means,

* there are objective criteria for superior performance
* you have a teacher who provides practice activities

This means you can do deliberate practice for things like chess, singing,
powerlifting, or rote memorization, but probably not for things like
management, software engineering[^1], or gardening. Taskmaster challenges in
the _Spider-Man_ PS4 game can probably be deliberately practiced, as there is
surely enough advice on the internet to act as a teacher.

The reason for the distinction comes down to _mental representations_.
Simplistically, what makes experts expert are their superior mental
representations of the field. It's the almost limitless adaptability of the
brain that allows humans to acquire amazing abilities.

If you have the "highly developed, broadly accepted training methods" that
generally accompany fields with objective criteria and teachers, then you can
build your mental representations brick by brick, avoiding dead ends or
relearning things. Essentially, there's a known skill tree for violin, but not
for management.

One thing that struck me is the ratio between _practice_ and _performance_. A
professional cellist or quarterback spends vastly more time practicing than
performing. On the other hand, at work, I'm more or less expected to spend my
entire time performing. The evidence for doctors is that this only blunts
their skills. There's a _little_ advice on this in _Peak_, but I think I'll
save it for another post.

Practice is hard, unenjoyable, and expensive. This means motivation matters.
_Peak_ reminds us that we don't suffer from an innate lack of willpower, but
instead that motivation is something we can manage. Remove distractions,
create incentives, find rewards in the thing itself, rig the game so you can
see concrete signs of improvement.

And because it's hard, unenjoyable, and expensive, you need to be very choosy
about what you practice. This is also because time spent practicing is usually
time not spent performing.

Oh, and "ten thousand hours" is rubbbish.

I highly recommend this book. I'm intending to seriously apply its principles
to my endeavours in 2019.

[^1]: But you probably could for whiteboard programming challenges or writing fast code
[^2]: An earlier version of this post also said "David", but that's not true
