# Ramblings while unwell

I'm off sick for the second day this week, after also being unwell on Sunday.

I feel a weird, borderline sense of maybe I'm well enough to go about with
normal activities, but then when I try everything is a massive struggle. It's
hard to say whether this is a physical problem, a mental problem, or a failure
of character. There are definite physical symptoms, but Jolie's basically got
the same things and she's soldiering on.

I had the same kind of illness in March and early April. I'm worried it's a
persistent thing.

Currently sitting in a cafe with a reasonable view of the sunshine, as it
seems a healthier thing than moping at home.

I'm also a bit short on entertainment. My normal way of entertaining myself
when I have free time during the day is to write code, do a crossword, or, if
I'm really low on energy, play video games. I am really low on energy, but the
video game I've got to hand is _Dishonored 2_. It wouldn't be so bad, except
I'm on a level that requires a ridiculous amount of problem solving and that's
way too much like work.

I could maybe do some coding where nothing hangs in the balance, where the
consequences don't matter, but I've got so much on my plate that that feels
like a stupid idea.

I tried going to the gym, but I ended up sitting on a chair in my gym clothes
staring at the door for what turned out to be an hour.

Sleep eluded me yesterday, even though I spent many hours lying in bed. I'm a
little bit wary of repeating the experience.

I guess I'm whinging. Maybe writing this down will help me next time it
happens.

I'm going to go home and try to read by the river.
