# Fiction reading roundup

Some quick reflections on things I've read recently.

## Terry Pratchett

Work has been quite stressful recently. I've not been feeling well physically,
and I have had to time off for my own health and separately to do childcare.
This has meant less time to do work, which means getting behind on my
workload, which means more stress. Ugh.

In the wake of this, I've been looking for comfort reading, and there are few
things more comfortable than Terry Pratchett on top form.

Here's what I've read recently:

* _Wee Free Men_
* _Monstrous Regiment_
* _A Hat Full of Sky_

It's the first time I've read of any of these. I liked all of them, but I
liked the Tiffany Aching books more than _Monstrous Regiment_. They feel like
maybe Pratchett is making a special effort to do it right.

We got _Wee Free Men_ for my niece a couple of years ago, and I'm glad we did.

## Nemesis, Agatha Christie

Keeping up with the theme of comfort reading, I've dipped into our Agatha
Christie collection at home. I've read a few Christies, and didn't much like
the last one I read, but I was assured by Jolie that the Miss Marple stories
are all pretty good.

_Nemesis_ is lots of fun, and I imagine is almost prototypical Marple. She
wanders around being old and inquisitive and humble and accidentally solves a
mystery that she's been asked to solve by a dead man.

## T. Kingfisher

DRMacIver recommended the Clocktaur War books to me. I had intended to read
them while on holiday, but accidentally read through the two books in no time
at all.

In premise, the books are a little like a D&D campaign: a diverse group is
drawn together and compelled to go on a quest. In this regard, there's not a
whole lot of novelty.

What makes these books great are the two point of view characters, and the
clear love the author has for both of them. Each page is a delight, and the
books are almost impossible to put down.

## The Raven Tower, Ann Leckie

Ann Leckie can do no wrong.

I've been looking forward to this, her first fantasy book, for months, and now
that I've read it, my only complaint is that it's too short.

If you've read the _Ancillary Justice_ books, you'll recognise some themes in
common. Like them, _Raven Tower_ has a point-of-view character with a
fundamentally alien perspective. And like all her published works, she engages
with non-traditional gender.

I think I'd like to read this one again.
