# Reading: Rust Programming Language

My daughter's nursery has been closed this week, so I've mostly taken this
week off to look after her.

To get my technical fix, I've been reading the printed copy of the [Rust
Book](https://nostarch.com/Rust2018). I've flicked through the [free, online
version](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/title-page.html) often enough, but I
wanted to sit down and actually understand things, rather than play
whack-a-mole on occasional topics of ignorance.

It's a really good book, if you want to learn Rust. It's structured very well,
so reading straight through makes a lot of sense. The writing is clear, and
the examples are simple and illuminating without being cute or overly
contrived.

The tone is great, too. It feels like you've got someone by your side helping
you. The book also emphasises Rust's open source nature, often saying that the
things in the language were built by people like you (the reader), and maybe
you can do something cool like that too.

Now that I'm actually tinkering with Rust again, there are definitely parts
that haven't stuck. I still haven't quite internalised how references and
slices relate to each other--just what *is* the difference between `&[u8]` and
`&Vec<u8>`--and I'm still playing whack-a-mole when I use iterators?

I also found the chapter on smart pointers a bit of a drag, because I wasn't
really sure that I would need to actually use that functionality. Then I go
off and implement something that messes with
[comrak](https://docs.rs/comrak/), which uses `RefCell` everywhere.

If you're already a programmer (even if you're not very experienced) and you'd
like to learn Rust, you should read this book. If you're not sure if you'd
like to learn Rust, maybe start reading this book and see.
