# Review: Measure What Matters

Are you looking for a book to help you do OKRs properly at your organization?
Skip this one and use [Google's OKR
guide](https://rework.withgoogle.com/guides/set-goals-with-okrs/steps/introduction/)
instead.

John Doerr helped make Google. He was at one of the VCs that invested in
Google, and he taught Larry and Sergey about OKRs. In _Measure What Matters_,
he has packaged his hard-won expertise in popular business book format,
replete with football metaphors, informal case studies, and inspiring quotes
from titans of industry.

As it goes, it's not awful. The book aims to introduce the reader to the idea
of OKRs, to convince them of their utility, and to inspire them to go forth
and set OKRs themselves. None of these mattered to me.

I did not need to be introduced to OKRs, as I was already familiar with them
from my time at Google. In any case, the idea is very simple: pick a small
number of things that you want to do, decide how to measure those things, then
do them.

I didn't need to be convinced or inspired, either. Memrise is already using
OKRs, and although we're still figuring out how to actually do that, we're
committed to the concept. Personally, I am one hundred percent into having a
small number of measurable things to focus on. What I desperately need is help
in doing so: how do you set good OKRs? how do you avoid them becoming a todo
list? how should a team's OKRs relate to the rest of the organization? how do
you come up with good metrics for things that are hard to measure?

_Measure What Matters_ helps a little with these, but it's so slow. The book
is four times longer than it needs to be. Every second chapter is a detailed,
real world case study written by an implementer of OKRs. They are all very
impressive, but largely pointless if you already want to do OKRs.

As I was reading it, I often thought that Doerr wrote the book merely to check
a box: he is the OKR guy, there is much interest in OKRs, therefore he must
write the OKR book. Reflecting now, I think he actually wrote it as an
evangelistic tract to spread the good news of OKRs to American managers. If
so, I'm not fit to judge it.

The book has two halves. The second half is not about OKRs at all, but rather
about a performance management system that works very well with OKRs. I
skipped this entirely, as I was already bored by the book and because that's a
problem I don't have to worry about right now.

If you're like me, I suggest you use the [OKR guide on
re:Work](https://rework.withgoogle.com/guides/set-goals-with-okrs/steps/introduction/)
instead.
