# Functions without parameters

Why do functions have parameter lists?

```python
def add(x, y):
    return x + y
```

Here, `x` and `y` are formal parameters of `add`. When you want to call the
function, you specify arguments (also called "actual arguments"), e.g.

```python
add(x=2, y=3)
```

Why do we bother to enumerate the parameters, rather than write code like
this?

```python
def add:
    return x + y
```

We could still call it with `add(x=2, y=3)` and Python would know how to
assign which value to which parameter, so it's not a hard constraint. So why
don't we do it?

Here are three reasons I can think of.

_It makes functions harder to use_. To call a function, you need to know its
parameter list. The only way to determine the parameter list is to read
through the entire implementation and take notes.

This is fine for `add` and `mul`, but reading through ten, twenty or even
fifty lines of code to figure out parameters is going to be tedious and error
prone.

_You can't tell mistakes from intent_. Without a formal parameter list, any
undeclared variable becomes a parameter. If you misspell a name, that becomes
a new parameter, and you won't be able to spot the mistake while you're
writing the function (which is when you want to spot it). You'll only spot it
when you are trying to use the function (which is when you are trying to get
something else done).

_It makes composition harder to follow_. Imagine we had a similar function:

```python
def mul:
    return x * y
```

How would you use `add` and `mul` to say (2 + 3) * (4 + 5)?

```python
mul(x=add(x=2, y=3), y=add(x=4, y=5))
```

I guess that could work, but it requires getting a lot of things right.
Perhaps someone more creative than me could come up with an example that
doesn't work at all.

Maybe you can think of more reasons for why we want to have formal parameter
lists for our functions.

Now we've got that out of the way, I have another question.

What's the difference between a function and a template?

```
<html>
<head><title>{{ title }}</title></head>
<body>
  <h1>{{ title }}</h1>
</body>
</html>
```
