# The Galahad Principle

You may have heard of the [Pareto
principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_principle). The idea is that
80% of the effects come from 20% of the causes. When it's applied to projects,
it often gets translated into "80% of the value comes from 20% of the work".
You could imagine a curve that rises steeply, almost linearly, at first and
then curves off until it's almost flat at 100%, indicating the diminishing
returns of extra labour. There are a lot of times when this is a great model.

If you are migrating a large code base from one library to another, there's a
huge step jump in value when you've migrated 100% of the call sites.

95% code coverage is interesting and great and all, but when you get to 100%
code coverage, you gain extra super powers. You *know* that any code you look
at either has tests or has been explicitly flagged as not tested. Your
coverage reports no longer feel like a puritanical uncle, sternly chastising
you for your profligate ways, but instead point you to bugs, or gaps between
your understanding and what the code actually does.

If you have all of your appointments in your calendar, and none of your
non-appointments, you can trust your calendar.

There are many systems and situations where you only get value once the work
is at 100%. A lot of the time, this boils down to two values:

1. Simplicity
2. Trust

100% is simple. Much simpler than 76%. If 100% of your tests pass, but then
one starts to fail, you know with certainty that you need to do something, and
you know with certainty *what you need to do something about*. If a whole
bunch of your tests are failing, and another one starts to fail, then that's a
much more complex signal, and thus a weaker call to action.

Trust is different. If 100% of the doohickeys live in the second-drawer down
in the kitchen, then you only have to look in one place when you need to find
a doohickey. If the doohickey you want isn't there, you *know* you don't have
one--absence of evidence becomes evidence of absence. If some of the
doohickeys live on a shelf in the hallway cupboard, you have to check two
places, and what was simple (1) becomes complicated (more than 1).

But that's a terrible illustration. The idea I'm trying to get at is that if
something can be trusted absolutely, then you don't have to think about it,
which frees you up to think about other things. In many ways, this is the
point of abstraction.

This idea of value only being reached at 100% also crops up in fiction:

> My strength is as the strength of ten
> Because my heart is pure

No one ever said "my strength is as the strength of eight because my heart is
pure-ish".

As such, I propose that we refer to situations where getting to 100% yields
disproportionate value as "the Galahad principle", based on these lines from
Alfred Tennyson's poem _Sir Galahad_.
