# Reading: Lost Acre

This is the third in the _Rotherweird_ trilogy by Andrew Caldecott, and
continues the story of the first two.

What follows is largely negative, and that's a shame. All three books are
entertaining, deeply original, and well worth your time and money.

The problems is that all three books in the _Rotherweird_ trilogy have
confusing, overly complicated plots that don't pay off, or at least, not as
much as their complexity deserves. _Lost Acre_ is not worse than the others.
It's rather that with the culmination of the series, any hope of a brighter
conclusion is lost.

It's definitely possible that I'm not an attentive enough reader. I read
fiction mostly in bed, and from comparing notes with my wife about, say,
murder mysteries, I elide a lot of physical details from my imagination.

But, I'm going to go out on a limb and blame the author for this one. A little
more hand-holding would have been just fine.

_Lost Acre_ also introduces at least one new character in a book already
crowded with them. The character wasn't foreshadowed, and didn't have any
thematic resonance that I could detect, so I was a little bit baffled as to
why Caldecott thought this already busy book needed more in it.

Also, I don't think his cryptic crossword puzzles are very good.

These criticisms are coming from a place of love. When trying to describe the
_Rotherweird_ books I genuinely struggle, and end up saying something like
"it's like _Gormenghast_ crossed with Miss Marple and the Claremont/Davis
_Excalibur_ run". These are all good things, and it's a testament to
Caldecott's skill that he's made something coherent and delightful out of such
disparate ingredients.

Give them a read.
