# Why Slack sucks, reason #23: backpressure

At work, someone recently shared a [post on backpressure](https://lucumr.pocoo.org/2020/1/1/async-pressure/),
specifically in the context of Python. It's OK, but I think you'd be
better off reading [the medium post it links to](https://medium.com/@jayphelps/backpressure-explained-the-flow-of-data-through-software-2350b3e77ce7) 
or [Ted Kaminski on backpressure](https://www.tedinski.com/2019/03/05/backpressure.html).

Anyway, it reminded me of why Slack sucks.

The idea with backpressure is that any system (consumer of requests) is going
to get overloaded and needs a strategy for dealing with it. Per [Jay
Phelps](https://medium.com/@jayphelps/backpressure-explained-the-flow-of-data-through-software-2350b3e77ce7),
there are three strategies:

 1. *Control* the producer (e.g. slow down requests)
 2. *Buffer* the requests (e.g. keep them in a queue and deal with them later)
 3. *Drop* the requests (i.e. ignore them)

There's a variant of 3 that Phelps doesn't mention, which is handling requests
in a much cheaper way. For example, you could reject requests rather than drop
them.

*Control* also has a variant. The consumer can exert backpressure by
communicating information about its load. This requires producers to
cooperate, but this is more or less how kanban sometimes works. It's probably
better to think of it as "*signal* to the producer".

So what does this have to do with Slack?

On an average working day, I guess I get several Slack DMs or @jml messages an
hour. This means my mean time between interruption is something like 10 to 30
minutes. That's more than I can handle. What are my options?

The easiest thing is to *drop* the requests. That is, to ignore them. However,
the Slack UI makes this hard, as such requests are permanently highlighted,
and have badges that function as calls to action. It's also hard
psychologically to just ignore my colleagues. I'm also not sure it's the right
thing.

The next easiest thing to do is *buffer* the requests. Except, Slack doesn't
really have a way of doing this. The closest I get is starring messages that
need responding, or copying a link to the message into my actual todo list.
It's very fiddly. Also, my colleagues can't tell the difference between being
ignored and being queued. For some people, I'll say I'm busy right now and
I'll get back to them later, but I've learned others interpret this as an
invitation to negotiate, so I'll stay shtum.

All of which is another way of saying that Slack provides no *signal* to
people about how busy their interlocutor is. This is especially true when
there's a culture of DMing. When you DM someone, you have no idea how many DMs
they have had in the last five minutes, nor from how many different people.

Compare this with email, especially Gmail.

With email, there's no expectation of immediate reply. In Gmail, the Inbox
acts as a queue, so no special tricks are necessary with starring and what
not.

With Slack, you kind of need to have notifications turned on for DMs and
mentions, not so much because of other people's expectations (there is that),
but because there's no good way of reviewing the mentions and dealing with
them one by one, the way there is in Gmail. It has a default backpressure
strategy of buffering requests.

Dropping a request takes a single keypress (`[` on an open message) and then
you'll never see that message again, unless you search for it. In Slack, you
have to register an intention to ignore the message in your brain, and then
remember that intention each and every time you look at that message.

Email, like Slack, lacks any support for communicating your load to those
making requests.

I don't really have a conclusion for this. I just wanted to write down my
thoughts to get them clear in my head.

It's right to value timely, responsive help, but that's something we seem to
do by default. It's also right to value deep focused work on things that are
difficult and not as immediately rewarding as a colleague's smile. I think
very, very few people or organizations drift toward that--it has to be
something intentional. These values, help and focus, are in tension but are
not polar opposites. It seems reasonable to me that any organization would be
almost constantly debating and deciding how much to favour one over the other.

What sucks is when we let someone else's software make the decision for us. It
needs to be the other way around.
