# Notes: Two Cheers for Anarchism

This is a book by James Scott, author of _Seeing Like a State_, which you
might have heard about from [the ribbonfarm post on
legibility](https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2010/07/26/a-big-little-idea-called-legibility/).

_Two Cheers for Anarchism_ is a deliberately more approachable book that
provides some reflections on how anarchist thinking can be applied to our
world today.

Two highlights for me:

First, it's _good_ to have conversations about what it is that we really
value. It's normal and healthy for groups to disagree about this, but to still
have to work together. The process of reconciling these differences is
politics, in its best possible sense. When we try to sweep this under the rug
by introducing superficially objective measures (e.g. SAT scores as an
objective measure of university qualification), we avoid these crucial
conversations, and often don't even know which values we're signing up for.

This has echoes of some of Graeber's comments in _Debt_. He argues that a debt
is an obligation that has become quantified, and therefore fungible and
transferrable. If I save your life, you owe me an obligation. If I say that
obligation is worth $1,000,000 to me and you agree, then I can sell that debt
on to others.

It also echoes some of Michael Sandel's main argument in _What Money Can't
Buy_: putting a price on something can change what it is.

I don't think we always realise what we're doing when we put a number on
something.

Second is the claim that all of the major extensions in freedom within
democracies have come from lawbreaking. We like to think the pattern is that
writing to your MP or joining organized marches is the way to bring about
change, but historically, most changes have come after the establishment has
been genuinely afraid of the system falling apart. Scott doesn't make this
argument rigorously (it's not that sort of book), and I don't really want to
believe it, but I think he's right.

A potential application of this is that maybe it's a good idea to practice
breaking small, irrelevant laws or norms so that you've got practice for when
it comes time to break the unjust ones. This is appealing, but I'm not so sure
about it.
