# Notes: Rebel Ideas

A friend gave me _Rebel Ideas_ by Matthew Syed for Christmas, saying that he
liked the pictures. That's actually a pretty good review.

_Rebel Ideas_ is about diversity, but not in the way that I'm used to reading
about diversity. The book leads with the thesis that diverse teams will
perform better, and that the dichotomy between hiring the best and hiring for
diversity is a false one. So far so boring. All of this has been accepted
wisdom in my circles for years now.

However, the book takes an angle that I hadn't thought of, one that's
incredibly obvious in hindsight and doesn't need a whole book to develop.

You see, I thought that the false dichotomy between talent and diversity came
down to biased tests. If you have a take home assignment in your interview
process, you bias against people with family commitments (statistically,
women). If you have algorithms questions in your interview, you bias toward
recent graduates and folk who've had cushy enough jobs that they can practice
toy problems instead of building things for users. All of this is true, but in
_Rebel Ideas_ it is very much an aside.

No, the real reason talent & diversity are not odds is because the problems
most of us face are so complex that even the most talent or insightful person
can only see a tiny part of the problem space. If we want to see more of the
problem space, we need people with different perspectives. Much of the time,
these different perspectives can be at least partly a function of different
_demographic_ diversity, but they don't have to be.

All of this chimes well with my existing prejudices. For example, the book
_Hard Facts_ points out that the evidence suggests individual-based
performance compensation can harm team-level outcomes. When I raise this with
people in my network, I'm regularly surprised by how negatively and strongly
they react to the idea.

The book then elaborates more on how this diversity can help, how to stop
groups from becoming less diverse via group think, and so forth.

Two ideas are worth highlighting, and then a little personal reflection.

The first is the difference between _dominance_ and _prestige_ hierarchies.
Stereotypically, your boss is above you in the dominance hierarchy, but the
engineer two desks away who everyone asks for code review is above you in the
prestige hierarchy. People behave differently when the different hierarchy
modes predominate. Syed suggests that a prestige hierarchy is better for
figuring out what to do and a dominance hierarchy is better for making sure
the thing gets done. It's an interesting idea, and one that speaks to the
tension that runs through engineering management: when is it helpful to tell
smart, capable people what to do?

The second is that diverse groups *feel worse*. Syed reports on an experiment
where subjects were asked to solve a complicated murder mystery in teams. The
first group of teams, A, were made up of four friends. The second group of
teams, B, were made up of three friends and a stranger.

The teams in A had a much more pleasant experience than the teams in B, and
they were much more confident of their answers. The people in the B teams
reported having difficult discussions, a challenging experience, and were much
less confident of their answers. However, the B teams were also _right_ way
more often than the A teams.

If you think about this, it isn't much of a surprise. It's satisfying for
people to understand your idioms and pleasing to be told you how right you
are. Contrariwise, the more foreign ideas you're exposed to, the more you
become conscious of just how little you really know.

Most of us have probably had the experience of being in a difficult meeting
about some contentious topic, and then leaving the meeting only to carry on
discussing that topic with some of our more like-minded colleagues. If only
the others would just see! But the thing they don't understand is…! It's
humbling to think of this as a form of blindness or narrow-mindedness.

Reflecting personally, there are things I very highly value that aren't
universally valued. Off the top of my head: intellectual rigour, technical
expertise, action-oriented discussions. Conversations with people--especially
those in other functions--can be difficult because they value other things
more highly. If I want us as a group to be able to solve more complex
problems, I will have to be more ready to accommodate differences of approach,
and will probably have to exercise more empathy, while at the same time
holding on to the things I value.
